Introduce ADR for Project CodeFlare release process (#5)
project-codeflare/adr: PCF-ADR-0003-codeflare-release-process.md

# Standardized release process for the CodeFlare Project

|                |                          |
| -------------- | ------------------------ |
| Date           | 04/28/2023               |
| Scope          |                          |
| Status         | Proposed                    |
| Authors        | [Anish Asthana](@anishasthana) [Mustafa Eyceoz](@Maxusmusti) |
| Supersedes     | N/A                      |
| Superseded by: | N/A                      |
| Issues         |                          |

> | Other docs:    | PCF-ADR-002              |

Reviewer: It's unclear to me what the intended relationship between these two ADRs is. I think we should explicitly call out what this earlier one is intended to cover and why it's supplemental to this one rather than superseded by it.

Author: Added a clarification

## What

This ADR introduces a unified release process, testing, and versioning scheme for the CodeFlare project.

## Why

> The CodeFlare project currently has different release processes and versioning schemes for all of it's subprojects. This creates confusion for users when they wish to use the stack -- what components versions should they be using? How do external dependencies like KubeRay factor in?

Reviewer: s/it's/its/

> There are also no standards around testing for the project

Reviewer 2: Should probably have a "." after "project"

This ADR aims to document the overall release process for Project CodeFlare.

## Goals

* Establish a common versioning scheme for all CodeFlare components
* Establish a release process for the CodeFlare project
* Establish guidelines for CodeFlare support matrix

## Non-Goals

* Require all components to restart versioning from scratch
* Outline technical details for tests or CI infrastructure.

## How

We are proposing a unified release cycle for the CodeFlare project.
We will release a new version of the CodeFlare stack after every sprint (currently every 3 weeks), following normal semantic versioning. All components under the CodeFlare umbrella are expected to start using semantic versioning for future releases. Components are not expected to start versioning again from scratch (i.e v0.0.1). As part of a new release for the CodeFlare Stack, we will update the support matrix which outlines specific component versions and versions for important dependencies such as KubeRay. The components to be documented are as follows:

> * CodeFlare Notebook Image

Reviewer 2: The notebook image can have releases independent of SDK releases, mainly for urgent fixes/version changes (hence the funky versioning scheme currently), but in an ideal world should usually just release alongside every new SDK release (as it will already). Do we want to consider this as an independent component in the release process, or should that be tied to the SDK as well?

Author: I'm good with keeping it as a "part" of the SDK. @MichaelClifford what do you think?

Reviewer 3: yeah, I think we should keep it as "part" of the SDK and not its own thing.

Author: Updated.

* CodeFlare Operator
  * The CodeFlare Operator version will be aligned with (i.e equivalent to) the CodeFlare stack version
* CodeFlare SDK
  * Supported TorchX version will be documented under the SDK.
* InstaScale
* MCAD
* KubeRay
  * On a new KubeRay release, CodeFlare will update it's supported version by the end of the next CodeFlare sprint

### Images

> For published images, we are proposing repositories include the following three tags.

Reviewer: This line should end with a colon.

> Stable – This will be updated once every sprint as part of an official release

Reviewer: Can we make this a bulleted/numbered list?

Fast – This will be updated every time a new PR is merged into the main branch of a repository
Normal semantic version tags – These will be created whenever components require a new image to be published. This may happen more than once per sprint.

### Testing

Each component will be required to implement unit and e2e tests that are run on all PRs.
The CodeFlare operator will also include an integration test suite that will ensure stability of the overall stack.

> In addition to running the integration test suite on every PR, we will run it nightly in the CodeFlare operator repository with the `fast` tag for all underlying components

Reviewer: We will only run these on every PR to the CodeFlare operator, right? I _think_ that's the case, and if so I think we could reword this sentence to make that more explicit.

We are not planning to include integration tests in all component repositories to start.

> The components themselves have dependencies on each other as well that may result in updates being required for multiple components. For example, an update to the AppWrapper CRD in the MCAD repository will require us to update all the components below it in the chain. On the other hand, the codeflare-sdk will not accept changes that will break integration with MCAD.

Reviewer: The "above/below in the chain" terminology confuses me. Is something higher up in the chain something that a given component depends on, or is depended on by?

Author: Added a diagram

With this in mind, we will make sure that the e2e tests for components pull in the `fast` tag for all components above them in the chain. This will help us catch issues earlier in the sprint.

> ### Release Process

Reviewer: When do we expect this release process to execute?

Author: We have the following blurb under the `How` header:
```
We will release a new version of the CodeFlare stack after every sprint (currently every 3 weeks), following normal semantic versioning.
```
Should I mention this again under releases?

Reviewer: Ah, I suppose the blurb in `How` is sufficient.

    2. As part of this, we will be testing the latest component versions
    3. Update support matrix in operator README.
4. Create tag in operator repository and update release notes of operator version to include new support matrix.
5. Open a pull request to OpenShift community operators repository with latest bundle.
6. Once merged, update component stable tags to point at the latest image release.
7. Announce the new release in slack and mail lists, if any.
8. Update the Distributed Workloads component in ODH.
    1. At a minimum, we will need to update the README for Distributed Workloads to refer to the latest versions of each component
    2. Updates could include custom resources, KubeRay version, or usage/installation instructions.
    3. Update needs to occur within a week of CodeFlare release
    4. Make sure that the platform SIG is aware of these updates, so that the ODH release notes are updated as expected

Hotfix Process?
If a critical issues is discovered requiring an out-of-band release, we will follow the normal release process, bumping up the z stream version for the CodeFlare stack as well as the related component.

## Open Questions

> 1. How does versioning and releases for the distributed workloads component for ODH fit into this?

Reviewer: In my opinion, every time we cut a new stable release, we should update the ODH to pull in this new version. Ideally we automate that process.

Author: Does step 8 of the release process address your point? Or should I add a point in here reiterating that CodeFlare releases will not be considered complete until the distributed workloads component is updated.

Reviewer: Ah, yes, I think this is covered by step 8.

    * Currently thinking it will just follow CodeFlare stack versions.
2. Do we want to include a code/feature freeze date?
    * Leaning towards keeping this window as small as possible – something like 2 days before the end of a given sprint.
3. There’s work ongoing to include ui integrations for MCAD in the odh-dashboard. How does that fit into our release process?
4. There’s a lot of scope for automation improvements as well as testing additions. How do we prioritize these inclusions?

> 5. The CodeFlare operator currently uses pinned versions for component references, should we just use the component "stable" tags instead?

Reviewer: I don't think so. Using the explicit version references will make it very clear what version of what component is included in a given release of the stack.

Author: I agree -- I'll add a note in here and if someone feels otherwise they can chime in.

# Standardized release process for Project CodeFlare

|                |                          |
| -------------- | ------------------------ |
| Date           | 04/28/2023               |
| Scope          |                          |
| Status         | Proposed                    |
| Authors        | [Anish Asthana](@anishasthana) [Mustafa Eyceoz](@Maxusmusti) |
| Supersedes     | N/A                      |
| Superseded by: | N/A                      |
| Issues         |                          |
| Other docs:    | PCF-ADR-002              |

## What

This ADR introduces a unified release process, testing, and versioning scheme for Project CodeFlare.

> [PCF-ADR-002](./PCF-ADR-0002-release-story-and-branch-maintenance.md) is a related ADR to this one but is purely supplemental. ADR-002 covers the branching strategy to be used by all components, whereas this ADR is focused on higher

Reviewer 4: Wouldn't these be lower level details as they are specific to the project?

Author: Discussed offline

> [PCF-ADR-002](./PCF-ADR-0002-release-story-and-branch-maintenance.md) is a related ADR to this one but is purely supplemental. ADR-002 covers the branching strategy to be used by all components, whereas this ADR is focused on higher

Reviewer 3: minor nit, and maybe there is a reason for this but. the repo here is `project codeflare` and the ADR code starts with `PCF`. But then in sentences you are referencing `the codeflare project`. It might be worth keeping it consistent and always saying 'project codeflare'

Author: fixed.

level details.

## Why

The CodeFlare project currently has different release processes and versioning schemes for all of its subprojects. This creates confusion for users when they wish to use the stack -- what components versions should they be using? How do external dependencies like KubeRay factor in?
There are also no standards around testing for the project.
This ADR aims to document the overall release process for Project CodeFlare.

## Goals

* Establish a common versioning scheme for all CodeFlare components
* Establish a release process for the CodeFlare project
* Establish guidelines for CodeFlare support matrix

## Non-Goals

* Require all components to restart versioning from scratch
* Outline technical details for tests or CI infrastructure.

## How

We are proposing a unified release cycle for the CodeFlare project.

> We will release a new version of the CodeFlare stack after every sprint (currently every 3 weeks), following normal semantic versioning. All components under the CodeFlare umbrella are expected to start using semantic versioning for future releases. Components are not expected to start versioning again from scratch (i.e v0.0.1). As part of a new release for the CodeFlare Stack, we will update the support matrix which outlines specific component versions and versions for important dependencies such as KubeRay. The components to be documented are as follows:

Reviewer 3: Is there a difference between what you are referring to here when you say "codeflare stack" vs codeflare project"? If not, I would continue to just say "project".

Author: fixed.

* CodeFlare Operator
  * The CodeFlare Operator version will be aligned with (i.e equivalent to) the Project CodeFlare version
* CodeFlare SDK
  * The CodeFlare Notebook Image will follow the same versioning.
  * Supported TorchX version will be documented under the SDK.
* InstaScale

> * MCAD

Reviewer 5: MCAD may have multiple releases in 3-week sprint window

Author: That's fine -- we won't be stopping additional releases by components if required.

* KubeRay
  * On a new KubeRay release, CodeFlare will update it's supported version by the end of the next CodeFlare sprint

### Images

For published images, we are proposing repositories include the following three tags:

> 1. Stable – This will be updated once every sprint as part of an official release

Reviewer 4: Does this mean that each week a new minor semver will be released and that will become the `stable` release? or that at the end of the sprint we will just decide which existing semver is considered the `stable` release?

Author: I think it can be either.
My preference would be to create a new semver that becomes the stable release, but it is possible that there would be no difference between the previously released semver and a new one. In those cases, it doesn't make sense to generate a new release/update `stable`.

> 1. Stable – This will be updated once every sprint as part of an official release

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Stable – Updated once every sprint as part of an official release
```

> 2. Fast – This will be updated every time a new PR is merged into the main branch of a repository

Reviewer 5: will this be the case  for torchX and KubeRay

Author: I don't think so -- we will use upstream images where possible unless there are CodeFlare-specific changes we wind up making.

> 2. Fast – This will be updated every time a new PR is merged into the main branch of a repository

Reviewer 4: This should probably be `latest` or `dev`. I don't think `fast` is a good word to use here, it gives the idea of a performance gain.

> 2. Fast – This will be updated every time a new PR is merged into the main branch of a repository

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Fast – Updated every time a new PR is merged into the main branch of a repository
```

> 3. Normal semantic version tags – These will be created whenever components require a new image to be published. This may happen more than once per sprint.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. Normal semantic version tags – Created whenever components require a new image to be published. This may happen more than once per sprint.
```

### Testing

> Each component will be required to implement unit and e2e tests that are run on all PRs.

Reviewer 5: at some point we should start tracking coverage

Author: Yeah definitely agreed on that.

> Each component will be required to implement unit and e2e tests that are run on all PRs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Each component must implement unit and e2e tests that are run on all PRs.
```
The doc should be written in the present tense

> The CodeFlare operator will also include an integration test suite that will ensure stability of the overall stack.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The CodeFlare operator must include an integration test suite that will ensure stability of the overall stack.
```

> In addition to running the integration test suite on every PR to the CodeFlare operator, we will run it nightly in the CodeFlare operator repository with the `fast` tag for all underlying components

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In addition to running the integration test suite on every PR to the CodeFlare operator, the integration tests are also run nightly in the CodeFlare operator repository using the `fast` tag for all underlying components
```

> We are not planning to include integration tests in all component repositories to start.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Component repositories may implement their own integration tests.
```

```suggestion
Component repositories do not implement their own integration tests.
```

One of these two depending on your meaning.

The components themselves have dependencies on each other as well that may result in updates being required for multiple components. For example, an update to the AppWrapper CRD in the MCAD repository will require us to update all the components below it in the chain. On the other hand, the codeflare-sdk will not accept changes that will break integration with MCAD.

![codeflare_dependencies](images/PCF-ADR-003-dependencies.png)

With this in mind, we will make sure that the e2e tests for components pull in the `fast` tag for all components above them in the chain. This will help us catch issues earlier in the sprint.

### Release Process

> 1. Ask components to generate a new release.

Reviewer 3: Does this mean each component should also be releasing on the same 3 week cadence? Or is there room for the individual components to maintain their own release schedules?

Author: The thought is that components can release more often if required, but they will be updating the stable tag only once every sprint. As part of this, they may or may not need to generate a new release.

5. Open a pull request to OpenShift community operators repository with latest bundle.
6. Once merged, update component stable tags to point at the latest image release.
7. Announce the new release in slack and mail lists, if any.
8. Update the Distributed Workloads component in ODH.
    1. At a minimum, we will need to update the README for Distributed Workloads to refer to the latest versions of each component
    2. Updates could include custom resources, KubeRay version, or usage/installation instructions.
    3. Update needs to occur within a week of CodeFlare release
    4. Make sure that the platform SIG is aware of these updates, so that the ODH release notes are updated as expected

Hotfix Process?
If a critical issues is discovered requiring an out-of-band release, we will follow the normal release process, bumping up the z stream version for Project CodeFlare as well as the related component.

## Open Questions

1. How does versioning and releases for the distributed workloads component for ODH fit into this?
    * Currently thinking it will just follow Project CodeFlare versions.

> 2. Do we want to include a code/feature freeze date?

Reviewer 4: One benefit of GitFlow development is that code freeze isn't necessary. What most development teams do from what I've read is that at some point during the release process focus becomes more on bug-fixes and verifying the release candidate's behavior. Development can continue as normal on the `main` branch, but new features won't be included after the original release candidate is chosen.

Author: Agreed! Just wanted to make sure it's documented

    * Leaning towards keeping this window as small as possible – something like 2 days before the end of a given sprint.

> 3. There’s work ongoing to include ui integrations for MCAD in the odh-dashboard. How does that fit into our release process?

Reviewer 4: Can you provide some references to this work as a reply to this comment?

Author: (will share more offline -- I'm still tracking this down)

4. There’s a lot of scope for automation improvements as well as testing additions. How do we prioritize these inclusions?
5. The CodeFlare operator currently uses pinned versions for component references, should we just use the component "stable" tags instead?
    * Currently thinking "No" -- using explicit version references makes it very clear what version of what component is included in a given release of the stack.

## Alternatives

We didn't consider any other alternatives

## Stakeholder Impacts

| Group                         | Key Contacts       | Date       | Impacted? |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------ | ---------- | --------- |
| CodeFlare SDK                 | Mustafa Eyceoz     | 04/28/2023  | yes       |
| MCAD                          | Abhishek Malvankar | 04/28/2023  | yes       |
| InstaScale                    | Abhishek Malvankar | 04/28/2023  | yes       |

> | CodeFlare Operator            | Anish Asthana      | 04/28/2023  | yes       |

Reviewer 4: Just from reading this over. It seems like this is very focused on the `CodeFlare Operator`.

It is mainly focused on:
A) How to update to specific versions of the codeflare operator's dependencies
B) How to make those changes available in ODH
C) How to disseminate news of the new operator version.

Does this just effect the other components because it creates a requirement for unit tests and e2e tests?

Author: The doc may feel that way since we are treating the CodeFlare operator as analogous to the entire Project CodeFlare stack.

```
* CodeFlare Operator
  * The CodeFlare Operator version will be aligned with (i.e equivalent to) the Project CodeFlare version
```

Reviewer 4: > 

What does the Project CodeFlare version represent?

Author: The overall version of the stack. This will be pretty directly aligned with the Distributed Workloads version.
